[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Researchers in Turkey are
about to embark on an excavation
at the ancient site
of Karahan Tepe,
and they believe it's much
older than Gobekli Tepe,
the famous zero point
of world history.
If you were to ask any
professor of history or even
a self-respecting
armchair archeologist
to name the oldest monument ever
discovered, they would have all
said Gobekli Tepe.
But now, that answer
might be Karahan Tepe.
And this is creating
a lot of excitement
in archeological circles.
Karahan Tepe is said to be
much older than Gobekli Tepe.
Archeologists have been
working at the Karahan Tepe
site, which is often called
the sister site of Gobekli Tepe
since 1997.
The site is located near
Yagmurlu and roughly 35 east
of the 12,000 year
old Gobekli Tepe site.
Over the years,
archeologists have
made a series of
amazing discoveries
that the Karahan Tepe
site, in particular,
tons of buried T-shaped
obelisks, similar to the ones
carved with wild
animals at Gobekli Tepe,
have led researchers to
conclude that Karahan Tepe is
much older than its younger
sister, Gobekli Tepe.
Head of excavations at
Karahan Tepe, Dr. Necmi Karul
said that 12 spots estimated
to be in the same period
as Gobekli Tepe are now known
in the region, one of which
is the Karahan Tepe.
Speaking at the 10th
International Resort Tourism
Congress, culture
and tourism minister,
Mehmet Nuri Ersoy said that an
intensive and rapid excavation
program continues
in Karahan Tepe,
which to date has yielded
250 obelisks featuring animal
figures.
Ersoy claims that planned
excavations will prove
the settlement at Karahan
Tepe will be much older than
the 12,000 year
old Gobekli Tepe.
A 2016 National
Geographic article
recounted the fascinating
story of the discovery
and preservation
of Gobekli Tepe.
Professor Klaus Schmidt,
a German archeologist
who led excavations
at the site, argued
before he died in 2014 that
a vast labor force needed
to build the enclosures and that
this construction project pushed
people to develop agriculture
as a way of providing
predictable food and
perhaps drink for workers.
At the 2015 World Economic
Forum in Davos, Switzerland,
Turkey's Dogus Group
announced that they
plan to spend $50 million
over the next 20 years
in partnership with the
National Geographic Society
on the Gobekli Tepe site.
And Dogus Group chairman
Ferit Faik Sahenk,
said in a press release that the
reason so much cash was being
spent on Gobekli Tepe was
because this prehistoric temple
was the zero point in time.
Karahan Tepe may well be
Gobekli Tepe's older sister.
While Gobekli Tepe holds the
world record in media headlines
and elsewhere as the earliest
temple of its type ever
discovered, there are
several other contenders
for this crown in Turkey.
According to Jens
Notroff, an archeologist
at the German
Archeological Institute who
is working on Gobekli Tepe site,
smaller versions of the pillars,
symbols, and architecture
carved into stone Gobekli Tepe
have been found in settlements
up to 125 miles away, including
Karahan Tepe.
Professor Notroff told
National Geographic
that Gobekli Tepe
probably served the region
as a cathedral, and therefore
the surrounding sacred sites
were like parish churches.
The scientist also thinks
hunter gatherers traveled
long distances to meet,
worship, and help build
new monumental structures
through vast community
projects that included grand
feasts to display wealth.
Returning to Karahan Tepe,
according to a report in "Daily
Sabah," many more years of
excavations and research must be
conducted to determine what
exactly it was used for.
However, while it does
happen, scientists seldom
make big claims without
equally big proof.
And in this instance, the
researchers think that when they
ultimately get to Karahan
Tepe's excavation center,
it will be much older
than 12,000 years.
The archeologists
at Karahan Tepe
are also convinced that
they have a new zero
point in World history.
The mayor says the site will
become a priority in place
of Gobekli Tepe
and it will become
a new focus of national
archeological and tourist
attention.
Karahan Tepe is the sister
to the enigmatic Gobekli Tepe
that sits around 23 miles
southeast of Gobekli
upon an elevated
limestone ridge.
It has many striking
similarities to Gobekli.
Firstly, it consists of
T-shaped pillars, 266 of them
that mostly form parallel rows.
The pillars have
relief carvings,
and the site appears
like Gobekli,
to be deliberately buried
under a great artificial mound.
Although this could be
natural as after 10,500 years
of accumulation of dirt combined
with high winds could have
covered it back up.
The comparisons
do not end there.
It also has serpent relief
carvings, strange rock
indentations, large cut
marks, porthole stones,
and an unfinished
T-shaped pillar
still in the quarry, the
focus of this article.
Karahan Tepe was first
discovered in 1997
and was surveyed in
2000 and again in 2011.
Like Gobekli Tepe, it's
located within the boundaries
of Sanliurfa, ancient Edessa,
the birthplace of Abraham
around 30 miles from the city.
It's not an officially
recognized tourist site,
so they had to plan
their trip carefully
as it was on private land
upon the Tektek mountains.
Fortunately, a well placed,
probably modern standing stone
marked the entrance
to the track that
led to the farm that
is located behind.
When Andrew Collins
visited there in 2004,
the person who showed
him around was warned he
would get a beating if they
found anyone had visited there.
10 years later, and the owners
welcomed the occasional visitor
with tea and information.
No beatings entailed, just sweet
hot beverages and conversation
after the morning visit.
The dating of the
site is impressive
as it's dated to
8500 BC, contemporary
with the now
submerged Nevali Cori
and the later stages
of Gobekli Tepe.
There are obvious
similarities to these
and other sites in the
vicinity, but we've
heard that there was
a quarry on site where
an unfinished T-shaped pillar
still sits within the bedrock.
Kevin Fish diligently searched
for it with only one clue,
that it was directly to the
west of the main enclosure,
as mentioned in the 2011 report.
Kevin eventually converged
at the impressive monolith.
It lies on a rock face sloping
30 degrees towards the setting
sun.
At 18 feet long, it would
probably been the largest
monolith at the site.
The site is not excavated yet,
so this can't be confirmed.
And weighs in at
around 30 to 40 tons.
Its downward angle on the slope
on natural exposed rock face
may have been why this was a
preferred spot to quarry from.
As archeologist
Bahattin Çelik explains,
this is quite a practical
technique with roughly chiseling
on the side of the rock
to produce a T shape,
whilst carving the other
side 40 centimeters wide
and 1 meter deep.
The solid pillar separated from
the bedrock with this technique
and can easily be
removed from the quarry
with the help of a slope.
Andrew Collins
decided to measure it,
and discovered it was indeed
18 feet, 5.5 meters in length,
with a maximum width
of 6.6 feet, 2 meters
across its T-shaped head.
This is similar in size
to the twin monoliths
at the center of
Gobekli's enclosure,
C and D. The weathering
was very bad,
much like the exposed parts of
the pillars on the main hill.
However, what lies underneath
could be as well preserved
as Gobekli Tepe.
Altogether, Karahan Tepe
is a fascinating site
that begs excavation
as the significance
of the nearby Gobekli Tepe
has now hit the headlines.
After leaving the
site, the visitor
wondered if the location of the
choice of rock was significant.
Was the direction of the
quarry from the main temple
an indication of a tradition
that existed as far back
as 10,500 years ago?
Andrew Collins discussed
the possibility
that indeed it could be the
case as bringing quarried stone
from the west to the
east may represent
bringing it into
the light, sunrise
from darkness, the sunset.
However, the remaining
14 foot pillar
still on the eastern slope had
further avenues slightly further
East of it.
So again, it showed a possible
west to east movement.
Alternatively, it could also
represent an east to west
direction from the smaller
quarry to the main enclosure.
After searching through
some masonic texts,
a reference was
found to a ceremony
where the initiate had to move
in that direction, east to west.
Why this is perhaps could
represent facing one's own death
as initiation
rites such as these
are often about facing
deep rooted fears.
Whether this was on the minds
of the builders of Karahan Tepe,
we'll never know, unless, of
course, the site gets excavated
and evidence emerges.
For now, we can only speculate.
Another aspect that
grabbed Andrew's attention
was the fact that the
parallel rows appeared
to be serpent-like, weaving
up or down the main hill
or from the main enclosure.
In his initial
report, Andrew stated,
"It's even possible that the
zigzagging pairs of stones
making up the stone avenues
located on the northern eastern
sides of the Tepe signify
the path of snakes,
which are seen to descend like
living energy into the valley
below."
This idea is given
credence through the fact
that carving on the stone
seems directed up the hill as
if the direction of
movement is downward
through the various
sets of gateways.
After coming to this
conclusion, Andrew
dreamed of snakes, their
tails tied together,
each one trying to break free
of its bondage, all of them
writhing about in the process.
With this dream
came the impression
that the snakes represented the
containment, flow, and energy
of these stones
avenues at Karahan
Tepe, an interesting
concept if nothing else.
Earth energy springs
to mind as it
has been found in Avebury,
Brittany and Cornwall
that stone avenues mark the
path of telluric Earth energy
currents with a
crossing point often
at the center of the complex,
which would naturally congregate
on a hilltop.
More research needs
to be carried out
to confirm this hypothesis.
But with the serpent symbolism
at such a remote site,
it could even reveal the origins
of geomancy and Earth energy
science.
When they go back
in September, they
will have some equipment to
take readings and dowsing
rods to find out if
this is the case.
Divers working on
a submarine project
in McDonald Lake in the
Haliburton Forest and Wildlife
Reserve.
Ontario, Canada, discovered a
submerged manmade ancient stone
structure, possibly 5,000
to 10,000 years old.
For some, this is
irrefutable evidence
of a long lost civilization
that inhabited the region
before the last ice age.
One or two researchers
have linked the discovery
to Canada's Stonehenge, a huge
5,000 year old stone wheel
discovered South of Alberta.
Who were the people
who constructed
these mysterious monuments?
And what do they represent?
The Haliburton Forest and
Wildlife Reserve Limited
is a privately-owned forest
comprising 120 square miles
in Haliburton County,
Ontario, Canada.
The owner-manager of the
25,000-hectare Haliburton Forest
is Dr. Peter Schleifenbaum who
inherited it from his father.
Recently, various
sources on the net
carried a story about
a submarine survey
of McDonald Lake, a popular
tourist attraction, which
apparently took place in 2008.
According to the story,
during the survey,
divers encountered an
ancient stone structure,
which was thought to be
proof of the presence
of a mysterious ancient culture
in the area, life from Central
Ontario ancestors.
Staff at the Haliburton
Forest and Wildlife Reserve
would often see this unusual
stone structure balanced
on the top of a rock ledge
at a depth of about 40 feet
below the present lake
level whilst in the tours
submarine, which
was in existence
for a few years at the site.
The structure consists of
a 1,000 pound elongated
south-pointing rock, sitting on
a baseball-sized stone at each
side, which in turn
rested on a massive slab.
Initially, the structure was
considered a complex version
of a glacial erratic, rocks
carried by glaciers thousands
of years ago and left
where they happened
to melt at the end of one
of the recent ice ages.
However, when various
geologists and archeologists
examined images on the
subject, some expressed doubts
about its natural origin.
The main objection
was that the structure
has straight edges
rather than rounded,
which would normally
characterize
rock scoured by glaciers.
One alternative was that
the mysterious structure
was manmade.
But the problem was, how
could that be established?
The Haliburton Forest and
Wildlife Reserve Limited
decided to hire an underwater
archeologist to examine
the structure more closely.
Apparently, after a brief
examination of the structure,
this unnamed
archeologist concluded
that it was undoubtedly the
result of human activity
rather than an
accident of nature.
The company also
employed a statistician
to calculate the probability
of these seven rocks
in the lake falling
on top of each other
to create what looked
like a structure.
The statistician determined
that the probability
of seven rocks falling
into such positions
at the right time and place
was almost impossible.
But if the structure was
manmade, what was it?
Who built it and when?
Some researchers think it
resembled the prehistoric stone
cairns found throughout the
world, which serve as monuments,
burial sites, markers for
ceremonial land, or even
navigational aids.
Others think it may be a burial
chamber or perhaps a dolmen.
Dolmens are a type of single
chamber megalithic tomb,
mostly dating from the early
Neolithic, 4000 to 3000 BC,
found in a variety of
places throughout the world,
but mostly in Northwest
Europe, particularly
in the region of Brittany,
France, Britain, and Ireland.
The thick layer of
silt covering some
of the surfaces
of the structures
indicate that they are very old.
But beyond that, without
further evidence,
it was impossible to
say when it was built.
However, when geologists
were consulted on the matter,
they apparently
pointed to a drought,
which may have hit Eastern North
America between 9000 and 7000
BC.
At this time,
conditions were so dry
that water levels
in the Great Lakes
were as much as 165 feet lower.
And inland lakes
like McDonald Lake
may well have been at
least 40 feet lower
than their current levels.
If the structure of
the McDonald Lake
is a prehistoric
monument of some kind,
why was it situated in
such a remote place?
One theory is that the sparse
local population at the time
may have been attracted
to the spot by lake trout,
often described
as glacial relict,
as they are a holdover
from the ice age
and live mainly in deep
cold water habitats.
One geologist suggested
that in prehistoric times,
McDonald Lake was
not a lake at all,
but part of an ancient
river system, which made
an ideal habitat for the trout.
But no prehistoric monuments
of the cairn or dolmen type
exist in the USA,
Canada, or anywhere else
in the world dated to
anywhere near 9000 to 7000 BC.
Does that make this structure
the oldest in the world?
Or should the glacial, erratic
theory be examined further?
However attractive these
explanations for the Lake
McDonald structure being a
prehistoric monument are,
without further evidence
obtained in an independent study
or excavation unconnected
with the Haliburton Forest
and Wildlife Reserve Limited
such as contemporary artifacts
or signs of manmade tooling
marks on the stones,
we cannot say this for sure.
There are one or
two researchers who
have linked the
underwater structure
at Lake McDonald to a
mysterious monument known
as Canada's Stonehenge.
This would make the Lake
McDonald prehistoric structure
later in date, say, around
3000 BC, though still
unique to the area.
In his 2008 book,
"Canada's Stonehenge,
Astounding Archeological
Discoveries in Canada, England,
and Wales," author Gordon R.
Freeman puts forward the theory
that the ancient structure
is a prehistoric calendar.
A summary of the book on
Freeman's website states,
"The discovery of a $5,000 year
old sun temple and an ancient
time machine, Stonehenge
calendar in Canada led scientist
Gordon Freeman to groundbreaking
discoveries in Stonehenge."
During fieldwork and
research from 1986 to 2006,
Freeman found striking
similarities between the surface
geometry of the two sites.
These similarities push back the
boundaries of written history
and have far
reaching implications
for North American
and European history.
Could the same mysterious
ancient cultures
have built Canada's Stonehenge
and the Lake McDonald structure?
Perhaps they were both related
to ancient astronomical
observations.
Freeman describes
what he discovered
at the ancient site of Canada's
Stonehenge, located in Vulcan
County, Alberta, in his book.
"I have found an amazingly
accurate year-round calendar
in this sun temple, marked with
rock lines pointing to sun rises
and sets at critical dates.
I later learned of arguments
going on, mainly negative,
about whether Stonehenge
contained marked observation
lines to the summer solstice
sunrise and the winter solstice
sunset.
By applying what I had learned
in Alberta to observing sun
rises and sets
through Stonehenge,
I found that an accurate entire
year-round calendar exists
in Stonehenge."
The term Canada's
Stonehenge refers
to the monument known by
archeologists and historians
as Majorville Medicine Wheel.
There are between 70 and 150
Native American stone structures
known as medicine wheels spread
over the Northern United States
and Southern Canada.
Though each individual
structure is unique,
the shape of the most common
type of medicine wheel
resembles that of a wagon
wheel lying on its side,
with a central cairn from which
lines of cobblestone radiate
outwards to a surrounding
ring of stones.
The diameter of medicine wheels
as well as the number and length
of their spokes varies.
The largest so far
discovered, has
a diameter of around 80 feet.
Occasionally, there will be a
break in the outer stone circle
to allow a stone pathway
or entrance into the center
of the structure.
And sometimes one of the spokes
can be considerably longer
than the others,
perhaps signifying
the importance of the direction
in which it's pointing.
The dates of these medicine
wheels also vary considerably,
but it is acknowledged that the
oldest so far investigated is
the Majorville Medicine Wheel,
which was started around 5,500
years ago.
There is no doubt
that the wheel may
have served some
astronomical function,
but it is more
probable that this
would have been part
of a wider ritual use,
perhaps involving hunting,
magic, or buffalo fertility.
This is not to say that Native
Americans were not sophisticated
enough to build observatories,
far from it, but in one sense,
to state that the Majorville
Medicine Wheel was built only
to make complex astronomical
calculations is to apply modern
Western ideas from a 21st
century technology-dominated era
back into the past.
This explanation
reflects our own concerns
with timekeeping, calendars,
computers, and space,
not necessarily those
of the Native Americans
who built and used
Canada's Stonehenge.
>> The Maltese archipelago
consists of five islands
in the Central
Mediterranean Sea.
Positioned 60 miles to
the South of Sicily,
only three of these
islands are inhabited,
Malta Island, which is the
largest, along with Gozo
and Comino.
Malta has a long history going
back at least 7,000 years with
a wide range of
archeological remains,
from the megalithic temples
and underground chambers
of prehistory to the Baroque
architecture of the medieval
period.
The most spectacular and
enigmatic of the ancient remains
on Malta are the Neolithic
temples and tombs built 1,000
years before the pyramids.
And Malta has the oldest
free-standing stone buildings
in the world.
One of the most
fascinating and mysterious
of these megalithic
structures is known
as the Hal-Saflieni hypogeum.
A hypogeum is a subterranean
rock-cut chamber
of an ancient
building, and there
are a number of these
type of monuments spread
across the Mediterranean
in Southern France, Sicily,
Sardinia, and Crete.
The Hal-Saflieni hypogeum is
an underground tomb and temple
complex extending for
around 5380 square feet,
and is located in the
town of Paola, which is
in the south of Malta island.
The site was discovered
by accident in 1902
when workers digging
cisterns for new houses
above broke through the
roof of one of the chambers.
The first excavations
at the site
were performed by
Father Emmanuel
Magri of the Society of
Jesus and later continued
by Dr. Temi Zammit, the first
curator of Malta's museums
department.
Between 1905 and
1911, Zammit excavated
a fascinating collection
of Archeological material
from the complex, including
human remains, pottery, beads,
amulets, and figurines.
And he wrote a series
of reports of his work
at the site that was
published from 1910 onward.
The hypogeum was first
opened to the public in 1908
while excavations were
still taking place.
The Hal-Saflieni
hypogeum consists
of a series of oval
chambers, halls,
and niches set on three levels,
one underneath the other.
Incredibly, the
underground structures
were all carved out of solid
rock in semi-darkness, allegedly
using stone mallets
and antler picks
and later smoothed over
using flint implements.
The upper level of
the complex consists
of a hollow with a central
passageway with burial chambers
cut into the natural
caves on each side.
This is the oldest level
of the hypogeum in use
from 3600 BC to 3300
BC, and is similar
and plan to earlier
rock-cut cut tombs
found elsewhere on the islands
such as the Xemxija tombs, which
date to around 4000 BC.
The middle level,
3300 to 3000 BC,
was cut into the subsurface
rock as an extension
of the upper level
of the structure.
This level exhibits
exquisite stoneworking skill
in the elaborately
carved trilithons,
which are a
construction with two
upright posts with a
horizontal one set on top.
The trilithons are
set in imitation
of the built masonry
of the above ground
megalithic structures
found elsewhere on Malta.
This level also contains some
of the most important features
of the hypogeum monument, such
as the main chamber, the Oracle
Room, and the Holy
of the Holies.
Most of the wall surfaces
in the main chamber
originally had a
wash of red ocher,
tracing out spiral and
honeycomb designs, some of which
are still visible today.
The famous Sleeping Lady, a
12 centimeter long reclining
terracotta figure with
traces of red ocher,
was recovered either from
here or a nearby room, which
is known as the Snake Pit.
Believed to date
from around 3000 BC,
this corpulent ceramic
figure is naked to the waist
and wears a fringed skirt.
She appears to be in a deep,
tranquil sleep on a bed
with a rush mattress.
Along with other
similar figurines
from the Neolithic
sites on Malta
and elsewhere in
the Mediterranean,
the sleeping lady has
been used as evidence
for the theory of universal
peace-loving mother
goddess or great goddess
worship in prehistory proposed
by a number of researchers.
One interesting theory
regarding the sleeping lady,
whether goddess or not, is that
either in a trance or asleep,
she may represent a
place in the hypogeum
where dreams or trance
visions were interpreted
by priests or priestesses.
Such a dark,
subterranean context
would have been ideal for the
stimulation of such states
as it would induce
dreams and visions.
Alternatively, because the
area was used for burials,
the statue may be a
representation of eternal sleep.
The enigmatic
sleeping lady figurine
is now on display
at the National
Museum of Archeology
in Valletta,
the capital city of Malta.
Also on the middle level, the
roughly rectangular Oracle Room
has an elaborately
decorated ceiling
of ocher-painted spirals and
a fascinating side chamber,
which has the property
to amplify and echo
a deep human voice.
This is referred to as
a resonance chamber.
Whether this intriguing
effect was intentional or not
is difficult to say,
though the possibility
that these strange
acoustics were utilized
in some religious ceremonies
performed in the chambers
is an intriguing one.
The chamber resonates at
an intriguing 111 hertz,
which is known to be
a healing frequency.
Immersing yourself
in this frequency
can help increase
the healing process
of internal and external wounds.
The Holy of the Holies is
perhaps the most elaborately
decorated room in
the whole complex,
with its trilithon door frame
and pierced stone or porthole
entrance, reflecting
the architecture
of Maltese free-standing
Neolithic monuments.
The third and lowest
level at the hypogeum
is 35 feet below
street level and has
been dated to 3150 to 2500 BC.
It consists of a
maze of chambers,
which were filled with water.
When discovered in
the early 1900s.
As there have been no finds
of either bones or artifacts
from this level, it
has been suggested
that these chambers here
may have been designed
as storage for water or grain.
Water storage has
also been put forward
as the possible function
of the hypogeum at Knossos
on Crete, dated between
2150 and 2000 BC.
The primary function of the
hypogeum site was certainly
as a cemetery, as around 7,000
skeletons have been found
in the chambers, ranging in
date from 3600 to 2500 BC,
in other words, spanning
the life of the site itself.
This amount of human remains
is significantly higher
than the tombs could have
housed at any one period,
indicating, along with the
dates of the skeletons,
that the complex was used for
burials over several centuries.
The fact that no human
remains were discovered
in some rooms such
as the Holy of Holies
would suggest other functions
for these parts of the site.
Perhaps they were used for
funerary rituals involving
priests contacting
the ancestors.
An interesting clue to one
of the original functions
of the hypogeum
is the resemblance
of the site to natural caves.
The near darkness of the
original subterranean chambers
and passageways is
a little difficult
to imagine nowadays
with the brightness
of the artificial
lighting at the site.
But originally, whoever
was allowed to venture down
into the depths of the
hypogeum would only
have had the dim light
of animal fat lamps
to help them through the maze of
rooms, passageways, and niches.
Perhaps what took place
inside the hypogeum involved
some kind of procession
or ritual initiation
through the disorienting
labyrinth structure, which
included passing through
porthole entrances
into particularly
restricted shrines.
Such a mysterious subterranean
structure as the hypogeum
is bound to generate its
own legends and folklore.
Indeed, there are a host of
legendary tales associated
with the hypogeum, from
disappearing parties
of schoolchildren to
subterranean monsters
and underground alien bases.
The majority of these stories
can be traced back to an article
by Richard Walter in the August
1940 edition of the National
Geographic Magazine entitled
"Wanderers Awheel in Malta."
This war time piece discusses
the various underground
passageways on Malta
being used as part
of the fortifications and
defense system of the island.
It also states that
at one time, it
was possible to traverse the
island using these tunnels,
but the government closed the
entrances to these tunnels
after school children
and their teachers became
lost in the labyrinth while on
a study tour and never returned.
Apparently, the
parents of the children
claimed they could hear
cries of the children
for weeks afterwards coming
from under the ground
in several parts of the island,
as if some strange phenomena was
beckoning others to their doom.
In this single article from
the National Geographic
lies the origin of a host
of contemporary folklore
about disappearances and secret
tunnels underneath the hypogeum,
which has been mostly
built up on the internet.
The problem is that the
original National Geographic
article cites no
sources for the tale,
and no contemporary
accounts of the tragedy
have ever been discovered.
The hypogeum is not mentioned
by name in the article,
so we are not even sure if
the alleged incident even
occurred there.
The story has the ring of
local folklore, perhaps a tale
concocted to keep children away
from the dangerous tunnels.
It also brings to mind the
mysterious disappearance
of the Australian schoolgirls
in Joan Lindsay's novel,
"Picnic at Hanging Rock,"
1967, for many years,
believed to be a true incident,
despite the protestations
of the author of the novel.
Thanks to a number of stories
published first in the 1960s
and copied on the internet
over the past decade
or so, the folklore of the
alleged hypogeum disappearance
has taken on a life of its own.
According to these
stories, which conveniently
don't cite any
sources, 30 children
vanished with their
teachers while
on a study tour of the hypogeum.
New elements with no
foundation in fact
whatsoever were added to the
archeology of the hypogeum
site itself to make the supposed
disappearance more lurid.
So we have 30,000 bodies
discovered by archeologists
in the chambers, not 7,000.
And the remains were
all human sacrifices
to some underworld god.
In the best traditions
of the modern folklore
of underground
archeological sites,
the tunnels underneath
the hypogeum
are said to stretch
for hundreds of miles
all the way to the
catacombs underneath Rome,
improving on the original
National Geographic article.
We are told that a
British embassy worker,
or in some accounts,
an American tourist
called Ms. Lois Jessop
discovered a series of tunnels
underneath the lower
level of the hypogeum.
And in an unexplored
cavern, she encountered
several large, hairy
creatures with strange powers.
Apparently, she later learned
that this was the same cavern
where the children and their
teachers had disappeared
sometime in the 1940s,
after which the entrance
of the hypogeum was sealed
off and nobody was allowed
to investigate the site.
From working at the
British embassy,
Ms. Lois Jessop
went on to become
secretary of the New York Flying
Saucer Information Bureau.
The sources for these bizarre
stories include a 1960s printed
lecture by one-time director
of Borderland Sciences Research
Foundation, Riley Crabb called
"The Reality of the Cavern
World" and a chapter, "Malta,
Entrance to the Cavern World"
in a 1966 book entitled "Enigma
Fantastique" by W. Gordon Allen,
essentially a reprint
of the Crabb article.
There is one element of
these bizarre legends
about the hypogeum that has
some truth to it, however.
The site was indeed closed for
a number of years between 1992
and 1996, though not because
of any mysterious disappearance
in its tunnels.
The reason was that
major conservation work
was being carried out
due to the damage being
done to the limestone
walls by years
of visitors exhaling carbon
dioxide in the enclosed space.
To protect against
this damage, numbers
are now restricted to 80
prebooked visitors per day,
and a microclimate
has been installed
above the underground chambers
to regulate air temperature
and humidity.
In 1980, the fascinating
Hal-Saflieni hypogeum
was added to UNESCO's
World Heritage list.
Strangely enough, when
now visiting the hypogeum,
visitors are not permitted
to photograph, film,
or even take audible recordings
while security guards watch
over a controlled small
group of 20 visitors.
Many researchers
ponder, why is that?
And is there something that is
being kept away from the public?